# pytket examples

See the pytket examples built with jupyterbook [here](https://cqcl.github.io/examples/README.html).


## Notes for developers

The sources for all these notebooks are the Python scripts in the `python`
directory. The notebook files are generated from them with the `gen-nb` script
(which requires `p2j`). Do not edit the notebooks directly; instead edit the
Python scripts and regenerate the notebooks by running `gen-nb`.

The notebooks are now deployed as html pages using [jupyterbook](https://jupyterbook.org/en/stable/intro.html) tool. To make changes to the notebooks, make changes to the corresponding python files in `examples/python` and then use the `gen-nb` script to generate the notebook files.

Currently some notebooks are excluded from execution. See the `examples/_config.yml` file. These notebooks are still deployed as html pages but they are not in executed form.

The `check-examples` script (which is run regularly on the CI and can also be
run locally) first checks that the notebooks match what is generated by `p2j`
from the Python scripts; and then attempts to run all the scripts. For those
scripts that require credentials, it first tries to load them, and skips the
test if it fails. For those that require containers to be running, it first
tries to start them, and skips the test if it fails.

To add a new script, you can either create the Python file and convert it using
`gen-nb` or create a notebook file, convert it to Python using `p2j -r`, and
then run `gen-nb` to convert back. In either case, please check that the
formatting in the notebook is satisfactory. Then add the name of the new
notebook to `maintained-notebooks.txt`. If the new script requires special
set-up, such as local credentials, make sure it is covered by the checks in
`check-examples`.
